Jamestown Plus Critique

-- show montage of bullet dodging--

Well here we are. After five long years, Jamestown Plus finally makes its way
to PC.  Featuring four additional pilots, two brand new
levels, and the super gauntlet mode, there's a lot of extra content on
display here. Let's see how this version of the game holds up after nearly a
decade since the original Steam release.

For those of you that are unfamiliar with Bullet Hell shooters, here's a small
collection of gameplay to get you brought up to speed.  --Play DoDonpachi,
Deathsmiles, Mushihimesama, Blue Revolver--

While individual mechanics and aesthetics greatly differ in these titles, all
good shooters abide by two essential rules.

1). Visual Clarity. 

Can the player track what's happening onscreen at any given moment?  Can they
distinguish what lies in the foreground versus what's in the background? Is it
easy to tell what is and is not an enemy?  Are projectiles distinct from all
other objects, so that they don't blend into their surroundings?

No matter how many bullets are flying across the screen, a well-designed shmup
should always be visually readable by the player. 


2). Precise Player Movement

Given that shooters often require pixel perfect timing to avoid attacks,
accurate player movement is necessary. In general, you should always be able to
predict where your ship will go at any given moment. So systems like
acceleration or ending inertia directly work against this principle.

Although there are issues with enemy and player bullets sometimes being hard to
distinguish, Jamestown otherwise meets these critical criteria, while adding in
some of its own interesting mechanics.

Let me briefly talk about the combat basics. Every ship has access to a primary
attack, a special, and the vaunt ability. With the exception of the Armada
fleet, each pilot has a fixed firing pattern for their primary. Beam will
shotgun out a spread of projectiles, whereas Charge shoots out a more
concentrated pillar of them. A pilot's special is usually an alternate attack,
but they can also provide utility. For example, Ghost creates a doppelganger
that fires bullets, while Gunner can reposition his energy wave's firing angle.
No pilot shares the same special, so each ship feels distinct in their role.

When the player collects enough gold from enemies, they can trigger a vaunt. On
activation, a temporary shield is created around the player, blocking any
incoming projectiles. Additionally, until Vaunt's duration runs out, you'll
gain a 2x score multiplier and deal 50% additional damage.  On top of that,
when Vaunt expires, you'll receive an additional lump score bonus based on how
long it was active. Finally, the player can prematurely end vaunt to create an
emergency projectile shield, at the expense of putting vaunt accumulation on a
brief cooldown.  

Mastering this ability is key to success in Jamestown. The utility of clearing
out bullets for a short duration cannot be underestimated, as it can easily
allow you to reposition yourself out of the line of fire and save you from
death. Alternatively, it allows hyper aggressive ships like Ghost and Bomber to
get a few critical seconds of invulnerability near a boss. On the whole,
Vaunting grants the player several tactical options available at any given
moment. Do you let it quickly expire to spam the defensive aspect of the
ability, or do you draw out its duration to maximize DPS and score?
Additionally, you'll need to decide when you want to prematurely end a vaunt,
as it can save you from fatal damage which removes Vaunt's bonus score.
Overall, Vaunt adds in a nice layer of strategic depth to the already chaotic
bullet dodging, while forcing the player to consider the metagame ramifications
of their moment-to-moment decisions. I think this is a much more interesting
system than the screen-clearing bombs seen in other shooters, because Vaunt has
much more nuance to it while still being simple to understand.


Where Jamestown also sets itself apart from other shooters is with its insane
ship variety. You can choose between 12 unique pilots, 3 of which have
customizable specials and firing patterns.  While I appreciate all of this
choice, I do think there are some oversights with their mechanical designs.
First, the benefit of being able to fire from any angle makes makes certain
ships more reliable than others.  Most notably, the Gunner pilot, which has 360
degree bullet firing, is the most useful on a regular basis. That's not to say
that the other ships are bad, but I find Gunner's improved positioning to be
more useful than the extra DPS potential from ships with static firing angles
like Charge.

Let's examine each of these pilot in more depth. 

Beam is the first ship you'll have, being well balanced all-around, but not
excelling at anything in particular. He's got a cone shaped shotgun-spread of
bullets, which allows him to slightly juke enemies while still hitting them.
His special is a massive laser beam that deals insane damage to anything it
hits, but slows him to a crawl during the process. While this can be an
annoyance, I do find that this speed penalty can be situationally useful to
dodge certain clusters of enemy projectiles. His major downside is that he can
rather easily flanked by enemies, such as the seeker UFOs in the Badlands
level. I think of the "noob" pilots in the game (gunpowder, beam, charge, and
treason), I find Beam to be the most versatile consistently, thanks in part to
his solid firing pattern and reliable damage output. 

Charge is very good at killing bosses. While her energy ball takes a while to
power up, it deals a ridiculous amount of damage to anything it touches. And
unlike Beam, it travels through obstactles in the environment, allowing you to
take some potshots behind cover.  However, this is offset by the pilot having
zero angled attacks. And considering that the orb travels rather slowly, you
need to plan ahead and make judicious use of your special as whiffs can easily
result in your death. I find that she's weakest on levels with tightly
clustered enemies like Badlands or Phobos, since she has no way to deal with
enemy flanks.  As a result, I'm not a huge fan of her playstyle, as I don't
enjoy having to put myself in the direct line of fire to deal damage. 

If you're a masochist and hate your life, then Bomber is the perfect pilot for
you!  He's easily the worst ship in the game. How his gimmick works is that he
shoots out a slow stream of weak bullets. At any point, he can detonate these
projectiles before they collide with his special to create small but highly
damaging explosions.  In theory, this is a fun idea, and in practice if you're
aggressive enough, you can deal some outright obscene damage to bosses.
However, this gameplay loop has many problems. You need to either be
dangerously close to spam explosions, or split your attention between dodging
and detonating bombs, both of which easily lead to death. He requires so much
micromanagement to be halfway decent, a liability that none of the other ships
have.  Overall, he just feels punishing to play as. If his explosion and
projectile radii were larger, then that'd give you some more breathing room to
spam explosions or dodge more efficiently. But as it is, I cannot recommend
playing as Bomber when every other pilot is far less suicidal in nature.

On the opposite end of the spectrum we have Gunner, one of the most versatile
pilots in the Jamestown. His special allows him to reposition his energy waves
based on the direction he's currently moving in. This effectively allows him to
have 360 degree bullet coverage, a trait that most other ships in the game
lack.  As a result, it's hard to be flanked while piloting him, as he can
easily reposition himself out of the direct line of enemy fire. This is
especially useful in bossfights, where he can focus purely on dodging while
still passively doing damage. His biggest setback is the rather AoE of his
energy waves, but I find his mobility to more than make up for that.


Treason is unique in that he is the fastest pilot in the game. However, he's
got several limitations to counterbalance this. The most notable of these is a
fixed firing pattern in front of the ship, meaning that he's quite vulnerable
to flanks. While Treason has homing missles to help out, firing or charging
them will slow the ship down to a crawl. Additional, they can't be "dumb-fired"
and will seemingly always target enemies at random. Given that his primary fire
deals a rather mediocre amount of damage, you need to use these missles to
clear out enemies at a reasonable rate. Much like Charge, he struggles heavily
against large crowds (Badlands is particularly painful), though his speed does
let him escape chases more easily than most other pilots. A unique drawback to
Treason is that his speed makes his movement harder to control, which has
caused me to get hit by bullet frenzies.


Gunpower can deal some solid burst damage due to his three orbital TNT barrels.
However, when you fire one off using your special, your primary attack becomes
temporarily weaker with each explosive you shoot off. Additionally, these
barrels have a "sweet" spot where they deal maximum damage, so you need always
keep this in mind or else you'll regularly whiffining crowds of enemies. As
long as you're in the explosives' effective targeting range, While Gunpowder is
fairly strong at bursting down mobs in front of him, he has no way to protect
himself from being flanked. I find him to be a more AoE focused version of
Charge, as both ships rely heavily on dealing bursts of damage directly in
front of them to survive.

Ghost is one of the more unusual pilots in the game. Simply put, you're playing
as two ships simultaneously. On its own, his primary fire deals  rather
mediocre damage, especially in front of the ship.  However, this all changes
when you use his special. Depending on where you activate it, Ghost will create
a astral projection of himself that constants shoots out streams of bullets
above and below it. Activating the special in another location will cause the
specter to move to that location after a short delay. Pressing it again will
recall said spirit. While this phantom is out, Ghost is restricted to using a
melee weapon. Unlike before, this modified primary fire deals incredible
damage, though it has a significantly shorter effective range.  I'd say of all
of the pilots in the game, he has the highest skill floor, as knowing the exact
enemy spawn locations in each level is required to maximize the spirit's
effectiveness. Additionally, you need to be far more aggressive than any other
ship in order to deal damage, which increases the risk of getting hit. Proper
usage of vaunt is necessary for survival. The upside to all of this
is that Ghost can clear through crowds and bosses rather quickly once
mastered. 

The new Armada fleet operates differently in that you have the capabilities of
six pilots merged into three. Each ship can customize a loadout two different
specials and six shared firing patterns.

Truth be told, I'm not a fan of them. While the concept of fine tuning a pilot
to your individual tastes is cool, I find that the modular loadout system
ultimately makes these ships feek to be rather homogenous. I would've rather
had the Armada fleet split up into six individual pilots, so that each ship
feels distinct in its playstyle and role. As it is, many members of the new
fleet just feel like powered up versions of existing pilots. 



Drop is Beam 2.0. What makes him so much better than the OG pilot is his
ability to "drop" beams into place when activated, firing continuously until
you cancel the special, a bit similar to Ghost's projection.  However, I find
drop to be superior, as the specter needs to be placed above incoming enemies
to maximize its effectiveness, which can be nearly impossible in the middle of
a boss encounter. Since drop's laser fires directly from where you placed it,
it's significantly easier to reposition in the middle of a fight.  Secondly,
while his special is active, drop is not slowed down, whereas Beam suffered a
heavy movement speed penalty. 

Similarly, Espada feels like an improved version of Ghost. While both pilots
have melee weapons, only Espada is able to reposition it, similarly to how
Gunner's 360 degree energy waves work. Although Ghost has a source of passive
damage that Espada lacks, I find having supplemntary primary fire to be more
consistently useful than a specter that shoots downwards, as it's much harder
to reposition your pilot for maximum damage with the latter.


Corazon is a better version of Charge.  For starters, he has modular firing
patterns that she completely lacks, sidestepping her liability of being in the
direct line of fire. Additionally, instead of shooting a slow-moving orb in
a straight line, Corazon's special is controllable crystal with a
massive hitbox. It's really no contest. With one activation of his
special, you can clear out an entire screen of foes. 


Do I really need to say more? It feels like there is no reason to play the
classic pilots once you have their superior Armada counterparts unlocked. The
only exceptions are Gunner with his controllable energy waves (though
Grenadoe's aimable bombs function somewhat similarly) and Treason's improved
movement speed. 

Curiously, there's no practice mode to test drive pilots.  Considering that
you'll need to individual unlock most of your fleet in the in-game store,
there's no way to try out a ship and see if you like their playstyle before
you make the commitment. Such a mode would also allow you to get a basic grasp
of their mechanics in a danger-free environment and quickly swap between ships
for practice. As it is, you'll have to load into a level and wait for the
unskippable text to clear before you can try them out, which is rather annoying.

Let's conclude our discussion on Jamestown by talking about its level design. 
So what makes for a good level in a shmup? For me, it comes down to three things:


1). Avoiding Dead Time

Dead time is the cardinal sin of level pacing. The player should always be
making a meaningful decision, such as dodging bullets or clearing out enemies.
So when nothing is happening on screen and the player has no actions to take,
the level's momentum grinds to a complete halt. As a result, it's important to
minimize any wasted time. 

2). Flexibility

Is a stage designed in such a way such that it allows for multiple playstyles,
or are you shoehorned into a specific strategy? Can you aggressively rack up a
score combo, or do you play on the defensive? If it's evident that a single
"best" strategy exists, then there's little reason to try out different tactics
to maximize your score.

3). Variety Variety Variety

Simply put, repetition sucks. Both visually and mechanically, there needs to be
evolution to keep the player engaged.  With the former, stages need to be
memorable so that they don't blend into each other. Otherwise, the game becomes
a homogenous blur. The second point is especially important as the player's
skill needs to be tested in new and interesting ways to keep them on their toes
and give each level a distinct identity.


East Frontier is the tutorial level of Jamestown. 
--talk about each level--
East Frontier
Dark Sector
Badlands
New Madrid
Croatoa
Phobos 
Deimos

CONCLUSION:

Overall, Jamestown Plus is a great improvement over the original due to how
much new and improved content it has, despite the modular loadout system
feeling half-baked. If you're new to bullet hell shooters, then this is
an excellent introduction to them. It's also great for genre veterans due to
how unique its colonial steampunk aesthetic is. Plus, Vaunt is a fucking great
mechanic.



DISLIKE (NOTES):

Judgment doesn't explain that vaunt cannot clear out green bullets. Not a fan
of that Game is a bit easy on normal and difficult. Need to bump it up to
Legendary to get some challenge. Might just be me. 

